for the southeast whilst things are
heating up in the west what is going on
selena it is a bit of a wild one around
the country also
welcome to mornings i i don't know if
we've ever had the opportunity to chat
before
i think we may have but it's a fair
while ago
it's been available so yes right guest
appearance for this week
okay well uh this is very much a weather
lesson for you though there will be a
test on friday so
pay attention uh look the wild weather
we saw through the southeast yesterday
is the thing that's really cooled things
down that's what
caused that incredible fire danger and
then the winds that we heard about just
then and you can see it very clearly on
the satellite picture that
front just pushing right through the
southeast now good news is that things
have calmed down pretty
quickly behind it but it's what it's
doing a little bit further north it's
keeping my attention at the moment
because
we've still got some pretty strong
northerly winds ahead of this front now
not at the warning level by any means
but what those northerlies are doing are
dragging down some tropical moisture
from further north and that's going to
help
trigger the potential for some storms
later on more on that in a second
but for the southeastern corner things
have really chilled off in fact
snow this morning in tasmania down to
900 meters
while just a little bit further afield
lots of heat further north and i'm
keeping my eyes particularly on the west
at the moment
because there's a trough that's drawing
heat down into the south of wa
now for today not incredible
temperatures we'll see those really
starting to pick up from tomorrow
onwards for a few days
but there is an embedded low in that
trough and that's helping to cause some
gusty winds
ramping up the fire danger for the wa
coast so severe conditions
for the gascoyne coast and the northern
central west coast
today and you can see there's this broad
area very high fire danger behind that
still some very high fire danger on the
other side of the country celina but
nothing like what we saw yesterday now
those storms you mentioned nate that are
expected in the north and the east tell
us a bit more about
what so well if you can what you can
expect for the storm what
what the forecasts are yeah it's not
just today
either but today is where we're going to
see that really starting to kick off
through eastern australia you see as the
front moves up remember those
tropical northerlies there those storms
through the afternoon for large parts of
eastern new south wales we're likely to
see some severe thunderstorms later on
today
most of that will be around the central
east so likely getting into the hunter
as well
potentially some pretty wild weather
further north we've also got lots of
storms across northern australia and
through
queensland and that's continuing all
week in fact the storms for eastern
australia are continuing for much of the
week as well so 2020
if you're in eastern or northern
australia is finishing off with a wet
and stormy one there's a potential for
some hefty falls as well so looking at
the
forecast for the coming eight days we've
got plenty of rain through the north in
fact the totals are looking really
healthy
getting into the triple digits in parts
of northern australia and then you can
see it there
through the east some pretty hefty
totals as well
so uh quite a wild way to end for some
parts of the country but
in the south and the southwest it's all
clear skies and combined with that heat
later in the week for wa that'll start
ramping up the fire danger there so i'm
keeping a close eye on that but
we've already got storm warnings on
normally i don't get to talk about
thunderstorm warnings much because they
don't really start kicking off till the
afternoon but
queensland's already seeing some for the
central west today
the earlier this morning selena more
than 50 millimeters
fell in an hour so some incredible
totals here
keeping an eye on that it's likely we'll
see an update from the bureau in the
next hour or so
and hopefully some of those storms will
have eased off but there's likely be
plenty more later on in the day
now uh nate take us around the states
all right let's
uh well let's start in queensland since
we hear plenty more thunderstorm
activity across most of the state
particularly for the north and the west
and we could see some of those severe
cells continuing and then more
developing later on
the south east of the state staying
completely clear so good news there
but for the southwest with the tail end
of that front coming through we could
see a couple of dust storms
they'll likely develop from late this
afternoon and through this evening
for brisbane though it's staying fine
it's getting to 31 degrees
now further south in new south wales
we'll see that unsettled weather
mostly through the east but the north
also copying some of that
and the chance we'll see some severe
afternoon storms as well
certainly for the central east but
further afield we could see some
lightning
sydney has a possible storm maybe a
couple of showers to go with it 28
degrees
not likely that you'll get those severe
cells but we'll keep a close eye on it
for you anyway
for canberra a couple of showers and
maybe a storm there as well it's aiming
for 29 degrees
now further south temperatures have
crashed across victoria but
it's a drier day some showers just the
last of them clearing out of the east as
we speak
much cooler temperatures but a settled
day across the state melbourne's staying
fine it's getting to 18 degrees
and for tasmania well showers for the
west in the far south this morning and
that has some snow in it
all the way down to 900 meters so
quite a contrast to what's happening
further north all of that wet weather
should clear through this afternoon
though for how about it's staying fine
it's getting to
19. over in south australia we've got a
clear day as well
couple of showers maybe for the far
northeast
and some windy conditions causing dust
storms through the northeast of the
state
for adelaide though we've got a fine day
it's getting to 21.
now over in the west we've got windy hot
conditions along the west coast
certainly you can see temperatures well
into the 40s there but a clear day
almost across the board
we might just see a couple of the storms
from further north
making it down into the gold fields but
for perth staying sunny and the hottest
of the capitals today 34 degrees will be
the top
and up top we are back to plenty of
thunderstorm activity especially through
the north of wa through the kimberley
district
but then also in the territory the south
should stay fairly fine but anywhere
north of tennant creek we've got storms
with the potential for some hefty falls
with severe cells between about tennant
creek
and catherine there's been quite a lot
of activity there already
and we're likely to see more warnings
later today but if you're in darwin
it's a shower or two and maybe a storm
typical for this time of year selena
top of 33. nate byrne thanks very much
the top stories now on abc news new
south wales premier gladys birajiclian
is expected to make key announcement
about new year's eve later this morning
as health authorities work to trace a
number of mystery covered 19 infections
a new list has been released of venues
in sydney's northern and southwestern
suburbs
where patrons may have come into contact
with confirmed cases of covert
the cluster which began in the beachside
suburb of avalon
has now grown to 122 with seven more
cases added yesterday
genomic testing of a return traveler
with coronavirus in
adelaide has shown they're carrying the
new fast spreading variant
that's emerged in southeast england sa
health
says the patient came from the uk and
they've been transferred to the royal
adelaide hospital
for further treatment the european union
has begun its mass
vaccination campaign against covert 19
a moment of relief for a continent that
has been ravaged by the pandemic
elderly care home residents and health
workers are among the first to get the
pfizer biontech
shot and australia is in desperate need
of early wickets on day three of the
boxing day test against india the host
started play on top yesterday
with early wickets piling the pressure
on the tourists but some terrible
fielding and a hard fought century by
standing captain
ajinka rouhani steered india to a
dominant position
india will resume play on 5 for 277
with a lead of 82 runs
well let's get more on those mystery
cases being reported in sydney now
and leading epidemiologist sanjay
senikaya
from the australian national university
says the concern
is a person could unknowingly be
spreading the virus
in the community sydney population
and the health authorities have done an
amazing job so far
so well done to them but yes mystery
cases are always a concern because
there could be someone out there
creating new chains of transmission of
covert that may not become apparent for
a week
or two not necessarily a super spreader
they may not be spreading it to
tens of people at one event but they may
be sort of consistently spreading it
and it might spread widely before it's
recognized
new south wales government put a lot of
effort into
their policies and restrictions and
their messaging so let's hope that
doesn't happen but certainly if there
are any large gatherings
of people particularly some who were
sick and never got tested
that is always a possibility so the next
two weeks
will be critical in terms of numbers of
covet
it's very unfortunate i mean we do know
that
covet is less likely to be transmitted
in the outdoor setting which is a good
thing
but people coming close together in a
party-like manner who are
shouting and singing etc uh does not
help with regard to covid transmission
so it is disappointing particularly for
the the large proportion
of the sydney population who are doing
the right thing i think whoever makes
the decision
the sydney fireworks they may or may not
go ahead but large gatherings
around it may not be a good idea
people can watch it on television or if
they're lucky enough
from their homes and really the
consistent messaging
about avoiding large gatherings where
possible and wearing masks if you can't
socially physically distance
rising coronavirus infections in the uk
are putting a severe strain
on the nation's health system london's
ambulance service says
yesterday was its busiest 24-hour period
since march
as doctors warn health services could be
overwhelmed as a result of relaxed
christmas restrictions
stretched to the limit nhs staff and
hospitals in wales are working to full
capacity
say the welsh government annual
illnesses
staff shortages caused by shielding and
the rapid spread of the coronavirus
variant
yesterday led cardiff and vale
university health board
to tweet this stark appeal
our critical care department is urgently
looking for assistance
from medical students and other staff
groups who've previously supported
proning patients the art of pruning
patients and that is about
moving patients when they're in
intensive care from their backs onto
their
stomachs and vice versa and this process
is quite heavy
heavy lifting and involves five to seven
individuals
medical students and others answered the
call in large numbers
and the health board later tweeted that
while staffing remained
challenging the critical care unit
remains open
meanwhile the london ambulance service
says it's had one of its
busiest days ever with more than eight
thousand emergency calls on boxing day
that's up over 40 percent on last year
the bbc has been told that student
paramedics and volunteers
have been enlisted to help those
representing a range of nhs services so
the situation is increasingly difficult
i never want to say that the nhs is
going to be overwhelmed because
we see hs being endlessly innovative
and ingenious in how it can actually
manage to spread incredibly thin
resources
but i think it's worth remembering that
things are
incredibly challenging in scotland
clinicians are issuing more warnings
this time that the nhs
could be overwhelmed mainland scotland
is now in tier 4 restrictions
the new faster spreading variant
combined with the temporary easing of
restrictions on christmas day
could they say have created the perfect
storm
for an nhs that is already overstretched
health officials have been speaking
about a breakthrough in the treatment of
blood cancer
let's listen in
this is a really important announcement
for patients with myeloma
because dazzle x is a completely new way
of treating this blood cancer called
myeloma
myeloma is a cancer of the blood so it's
like leukemia and lymphomas
in that it affects the white blood cells
except in patients with myeloma
their immune system is destroyed it's an
incurable treat
it's an incurable disease so having a
new treatment is incredibly important
for patients with blood cancers
this multiple myeloma patients
always relapse sounds good frontline
treatment
often results in two to five years
remission
but everybody relapses and so having
this new drug
particularly so early in the patient's
journey
from with myeloma is so important what
does this mean for patients does this
give
so much renewed hope this is really
important for
patients because it really gives them
renewed hope
in that previously the treatment options
were quite limited
now we've got a new drug acting in a
completely new way
which is which gives very very deep
responses which means that patients can
go for many years before they need
further treatment
can you talk us through in layman's
terms just how this drug
works to attack those cancer cells this
is a completely new way
of treating myeloma in that the way
it works is that antibodies are produced
in the as a pharmaceutical which binds
specifically onto
the abnormal plasma cell which is the
cancerous cell in myeloma
so it works like the body works against
viruses
antibody production and it kills it
we do have other cancers that work in
the same way but for the last 20
years we haven't been able to work out
an antibody that would work against
myeloma
so this has been a completely
new way of treating the treating this
disease
because we have no other antibodies that
are functionally effective in myeloma
is there a percentage or success rate of
how this works
what's really important about its
success is that for the first time we
see
amazingly deep responses patience
disease
is almost disappears and i emphasize the
word almost because it will come back
but the deeper that we get that response
the longer it lasts for so it becomes
actually undetectable for quite some
time
and it's for the first time we're seeing
responses where we just cannot see the
myeloma at all
it does come back but it takes a long
time
so this medication is something that
patients would have to
sort of be on for the long term as you
said that they do relapse this is an
ongoing thing that they will have to
live with
so once people are on the treatment
they have to stay on the treatment it's
an injection once a month
but i have patients who've been on it
through clinical trials who've been on
it for four or five years
so it can work in some patients
for a very long period of time the
average length of time
is about two to two and a half years
this is a big win for me because i have
patients who come in
every day who have relapsed disease and
they look at you and they say
what can you do and when your
ammunition is limited you feel very
vulnerable
and so to finally have this treatment
which all of us
as blood cancer doctors have been
wanting for the last
18 months it will make the new
year incredibly positive because as of
january 1st
we can give these patients real hope and
what's that like being able to tell
somebody that
the feeling is a mixed feeling when
patients have relapsed
disease on the one hand you're telling
them that
their lives are going to change yet
again they've started to get on with
their lives
and then suddenly they walk in it's like
a stalker at their door
they wake up one morning and you tell
them it's there
but you can the flip side is is that you
can then say
actually we've got a new way of treating
it and in fact
it may actually work better than the
first treatment you said
it's not racist it's incurable it's not
going to cure them but it will pull on
their lives it takes through just how
long
so this
this drug itself doesn't cure the cancer
but it gives us the deepest response
so in one way it gives us a bit of a
light at the end of the tunnel that we
may be able to cure this cancer one day
right now when used in combination it's
been approved in combination with
another drug which is already approved
called velcade
and it improves the survival and
improves survival by around
18 months to three years and is i've got
some patients who've
been on the drug for four to five years
and how incredible is it to
activate the patient's own immune system
and actually
have them i suppose yeah using the
immune system to fight this disease
so this is what we call an immune
therapy
so what is really important about the
decision by the pbac
and the approval is that it's being used
early in the disease
where the patient's immune system is
still functional and can
work with this drug to keep to to kill
the myeloma cells
so where we feel lucky that the
government is approved
to be used at first relapse where we
know it's most effective
and so using the immune system is an
incredibly powerful tool
and we're seeing those changes every day
in all sorts of cancers
were these patients previously
undergoing chemotherapy or is that not
necessary for this kind of so
the approval of this drug will mean that
less patients will need to
have further chemotherapy with myeloma
it's one of the
diseases in fact where we've almost
eradicated the use of chemotherapy
with some of the new immune and targeted
treatments that we have
and this is yet another addition and i
see patients today
where i know for i'll be looking after
them for the next
seven to ten years and they won't need
chemotherapy
which is an enormous change compared to
20 years ago
and can you just talk us through
obviously um prior to this coming on the
pbs it's
very expensive for patients it's not
accessible for probably most people
what's that cost going to be now and how
much more realistic is that
so this approval makes the drug
available
i have not had one patient who's been
able to self-fund because it's just
so expensive we're talking of 160 000 a
year
and potentially for many years so now is
in the reach
of every patient with myeloma when their
disease recurs
and they're only paying 41 a month and
just to clarify it's available to
patients once they've
undergone one relapse why is it not
available from start
the reason it's not available from the
start is the clinical trials
have not demonstrated as yet a clear
advantage
when you add it in earlier simply
because the trials have just been
completed
but i would predict into the future this
is a drug that's going to be used
first line treatment that's professor
miles prince speaking there from
melbourne he's the director of molecular
oncology and cancer immunology
at the peter mccallum cancer center and
the drug he was talking about there that
becomes available from the 1st of
january
is dazzle x and as you heard he said
that medical professionals have been
waiting
for 18 months before that this could
become available
on the pharmaceutical benefits scheme
and it's for australians with
multiple myeloma the mayor of the
northern beaches council is calling for
restrictions to be eased for residents
living in the lower northern beaches
mayor michael regan joins us now michael
regan thank you for
your time what are you hoping to hear
from the premier this morning
oh good morning um yeah look we're just
hoping to hear some
reassurance and a timeline of when this
is all going to be over what are the
steps or what additional steps need to
be taken
so that we can get ahead of this and
play our role in
keeping the community safe the premier
and the health people have been doing a
great job
behind the scenes to do that but we're
getting a lot of feedback now from the
residents
particularly in the south of our area
who've been seeing what's happening
elsewhere in greater sydney
and they're getting quite upset and
agitated that you know we're doing all
the
heavy lifting and we don't see any
restrictions being eased other than
we're back
allowed back in ocean pools and
playgrounds and today also golf courses
and
tennis which is great but um we're just
hoping to get some more clarity and
certainty particularly for business
so they want to hear about more certain
time frames
yeah i think that's fair to say because
honestly like the yeah you've got to
feel for the people in the north of our
community who are really struggling and
it's been a lonely christmas without
friends and family to celebrate with
so they're wanting some sort of
certainty about when this is going to
end they accept that there's been a ring
fence put around them in particular
because of where the cluster originated
um in avalon so but the people in the
south feel like that well if we've got a
different set of rules
why is it that we have to be different
to the rest of say
greater sydney where there's also been
some outbreaks and some
and venues being named so there's a real
uh
i guess a real apprehension and a real i
guess fatigue starting to set in a bit
so in splitting the northern beaches
into those two zones so
uh that christmas could be had in very
different ways in
in both those areas so do you feel
like uh the community is a bit more
divided
yeah there's there's definitely good
banter between the the communities and
the like but it's just more about
people are really struggling they want
to see their friends and family not just
on the beaches and within the beaches
and they want to see in greater sydney
so
um but when we saw the scenes we saw at
um bronte what we've seen in the
shopping centers and things on boxing
day that really sent i don't know about
the rest of the politicians but
certainly my computer went into
overdrive and text messages and
messenger and social media was going
into meltdown about we're doing all this
hard work here in the northern beaches
to make sure that we're on top of this
when is it going to end and why does
greater sydney get more freedoms than
the rest of us so i guess
it's it's really it's really important
that we represent all of the northern
beaches even though we're divided into
two zones
they've been very accepting they've been
very patient and but they do want some
certainty about what next and what are
the steps next what is it going to take
to have
restrictions eased in general is it a
number is it um
testing rights what is it i guess and
that's that certainty because
you know it is hard because this is the
time of year i'm supposed to be the
family and friends
in representing your community and your
discussions with the state government
what have they been like
how how would you characterize them oh
they're
very very busy doing what they need to
do but keep us all safe and that's and
that's
the job of the state government is to
keep all of the states safe it's
important they keep um
you know that it's under control and get
that message out there
and we need to make sure that we do this
uh together
uh and we've been working really well
with the particular department of health
and the officials behind the scenes to
do that and we've been giving a great
deal of support and
uh but the information and discussing
with the minister we got some further
easing of restrictions yesterday in
discussions with the minister which was
fantastic and
the premier has brought forward
decisions about new year's eve to today
or tomorrow which is fantastic and
that's needed for businesses across the
uh not just
the beaches but across new south wales
so public health and safety must always
come first and we've been playing our
role and we've been rewarded but i guess
yeah it's been interesting conversations
with the state government they're doing
their best
what kind of new year's eve do you want
to see in the northern beaches
oh look i think we accept that uh the
the fireworks we we canceled our
fireworks very early on uh
both newport manly and dui so i guess
what we would like to see is
to go back to just prior to the
restrictions coming down is that we were
able to go out to restaurants and go out
to bars
be socially distanced but do the right
thing be able to enjoy a meal with
friends and family from from anywhere so
i guess
those types of things would be fantastic
not just here but across sydney i guess
so that's
important i want to stress that it's not
just about the northern beaches and the
inland peninsula
we're blessed where we live we work hard
to to be here and live here but you know
business needs certainty
and i and the residents want some sort
of
way to put a full stop on the end of the
year i guess and particularly having
just gone through christmas
not being with friends and family and
not being able to travel to see their
loved ones
be they in the shower or be they you
know just across the bridge in roseville
what about the um elements of
christmas and those three days over
christmas where we saw
the two zones um and uh five people
allowed
uh at a home that were from that
northern zone
uh no one allowed out of the southern
zone but people allowed in do you think
the communities in the northern beaches
would be happy
with an arrangement along those lines
for new year's eve look i think the
community will be happy with um it's
amazing of restrictions full stop and i
and i don't want to speculate and say
that it should just be that
and be locked into that i think they
they want to be rewarded i guess for the
hard work and and i can't stress enough
they want certainty they just want to
know what is
what is it going to take to get out of
this altogether and
can we do this in measured steps like we
were rewarded for the great work that we
did i mean i think it's over one in two
people have been tested on all the
beaches now which is extraordinary
but the 70 000 residents in the north
split away from the 200
000 residents in the south it's becoming
a big deal and greater sydney having
more freedoms despite venues being named
so i guess
we just want some i guess some fairness
i guess and some even-handedness in in
the decisions making process
i i i'm like to say that we want this
this and this
i guess we're just wanting some certain
use of understanding so that we can plan
and prepare
mayor michael regan from the northern
beaches thanks very much for speaking to
us on abc news
thank you very much for having me well
with many of us hitting the roads over
summer it's a dangerous time for
wildlife
with an estimated 10 million animals
injured every year
greg irons from tasmania's bonorong
wildlife sanctuary
explains what we can do to help i think
the first step for anyone is
is to make sure if it's safe to stop
that we do stop i think it's astonishing
how many calls we get for
animals where it's not the person who
hit the animal that actually stopped to
call us and that's really sad i think
you know stopping to check first is
really important and there are so many
fantastic rescue groups around
australia and if we can just give them a
call and basically take their advice
before we proceed to
take an animal home or handle it the
wrong way or feed it the wrong things i
think that's really important
but also for something like this little
one here or any orphan we find
if you just imagine a pillowcase and a
beanie makes a perfect makeshift pouch
so
if you are going on a good journey just
taking a pillowcase and a beanie with
you
can mean you have somewhere nice and
safe for a little often like phoenix
here to go
prevention's much much better than cure
so driving a little slower at night time
is
is well shown to be the number one way
to reduce hitting animals
it doesn't have to be a lot slower you
know just going 20 k's an hour slower
between dusk and dawn
not just for the animal safety but your
own safety of course as well and
you know i think if we can take one more
thing as well is
maybe planning the time of our drive
that's what we really encourage
in tassie is rather than planning to do
a long drive as soon as these animals
all wake up
just arrange that schedule carefully so
you're nicely tucked up
hopefully around a campfire somewhere
while the animals are emerging rather
than driving between
point a and point b and you know just
awareness if there's a lot of green
grass on the side of the road that's
going to attract some animals both
this little guy here who's lenny is his
name or leonard
for whole um leonard and phoenix uh both
of them were actually pinkies so they
had no fur whatsoever when they were
found but
you know just a great example what we
mentioned you know the people who hit
the animals it was an accident it's
going to happen
from time to time they stopped
immediately they checked the pouch
immediately and while they both arrived
very very late at night these ones just
that difference between
getting into a humidity crib and nice
and warm getting fed the right things in
the right way straight
away you know that's been the difference
between these ones surviving and not
surviving
last summer the small victorian seaside
town of malakuta
was ravaged by a vicious bushfire
destroying hundreds of homes
now a group of plumbers from all over
the state has installed an
invention which they say could protect
the town's most important assets
if malikuta burns again elias kluwer
reports
just outside of the malikuda township is
a titanic era life raft
and a war bunker that doubles as the
town's museum
it's also the size of an invention these
plumbers hope
can save the town i didn't think that an
idea i had in my head
at 2 30 in the morning was going to
eventuate and what you're looking at
right now
the sprinkler system was installed by
the tradies free of charge it's
triggered by a text message
and then spurts out 800 liters of water
and the retardant frost check
in just one minute that's about 200
liters less than a fire hose can spray
but a controlled burn organized by the
cfa
the device got the tick of approval from
the area's fire chief
you'd have a sensor out in the bush past
these probably 30 meters out into the
bush
yeah and when that detects heat fire it
activates
this comes on after last year's
bushfires the plumbers formed the
charity
mission rainwater and installed plumbing
and rainwater tanks for members of the
town
free of charge they've made dozens of
trips back
since we just wanted to lend our time
effort and skills
jumped on facebook saw what i could do
jumped in involved in with some groups
that's where i found wayne but they're
hoping the town can now protect itself
long-term goal is to revolutionize the
way that assets and property
is protected by bushfire in australia
they're big dreams to prevent
another nightmare elias kluwer abc news
malacuta time for a check of the weather
now with nate byrne
good day selena we've got a very uh wet
and windy change that's moved through
the southeast though
things have calmed down through victoria
now but
further north that frontal system is
likely to trigger
some pretty widespread thunderstorm
activity through eastern new south wales
largely thanks to humid northerlies
ahead of it meanwhile over in wa the
moment a trough is dragging heat down
the west coast there's an embedded low
there as well with some gusty winds
it's helping to ramp up the fire danger
to severe for large parts of the wa
coastline today
but it's all going to be about storms
for the north and the east of the
country
severe cells already happening through
parts of queensland we've got warnings
on the heavy rainfall
for the central west of the state as
some storms roll through there
in fact most of queensland is looking at
at least some wet and stormy weather
today except in the southeast clear
skies there
dust storms potentially for the far
southwest this afternoon as well
brisbane you've got a clear one it's
getting to 31 degrees
and unsettled weather is expected for
northern and eastern new south wales
we've got a chance of severe afternoon
storms around the central east including
the hunter
sydney likely to miss out on that just a
couple of showers so there is a chance
you'll see a storm later
28 will be the top and canberra has a
wet one maybe with storms too
29 degrees there in victoria
temperatures have
certainly dropped across the state it's
dry after
just the last of a few drops in the east
clear off for melbourne 18 degrees later
with clear skies
and for tasmania we've had snow down to
900 meters this morning in the west and
the far
south now that's all drying up as well
after lunchtime hobart a fine 19.
south australia is clear maybe a couple
of showers in the northeast 21 degrees
on the way for adelaide and southern wa
is fine too some storms making it down
into the gold fields
34 on the way for perth and up top lots
of stormy weather selena with
maybe severe heavy falls around tennant
creek and catherine
darwin though it's uh just a couple of
showers maybe a storm top of 33.
nate thank you so much and that's abc
news for now
i'm selena edmonds coming up here on abc
news channel we'll be crossing live to
sydney
for a coronavirus update from the new
south wales premier gladys berejic
stay with us
[Music]
oh my god
that's looking good
i just can't take my eyes i just can't
take my eyes i
just can't take my eyes off of you
it's the way that i feel when i'm
looking at you
doing the things that you do
you're mad so i'm mad you're mad
[Music]
we're all mad good evening and welcome
to news at six last thing i need right
now is to get involved with a married
woman
i've got my reputation to think of what
do you know about what i want to achieve
let's just pretend that we live in the
real world where else would you rather
be
it's jack jack
[Music]
grandstand summer of cricket continues
live and ad free
as australia
live on abc radio and the abc listen app
watch abc news live stream anywhere
anytime
on abc iview keep up to date with the
latest breaking stories from around the
corner
and across the globe and you can catch
up on all your favorite abc
news and current affairs programs head
to abc iview and livestream
abc news now
[Music]
[Applause]
hello and welcome to mornings i'm selena
edmonds we are standing by for a
coronavirus update from the new south
wales premier
gladys berejiklian in sydney and we're
expecting that to begin
any minute now and we'll be bringing you
that live as
soon as the premiere begins to speak
she'll be with the health minister brad
hazard
as well at that news conference of
course yesterday we saw
seven new cases of coronavirus bringing
the avalon cluster to a total of 122
and there were 24 000 tests uh gladys
beragickley and just stepping up to the
microphone there now
chief health officer carrie chant as
well let's take a look to the 15
hundred people that came forward for
testing in the last 24 hours to eight pm
we do want to see those testing rates go
higher
and stay high to give us confidence
about the next decisions we can take
moving forward pleasingly there were
only
five cases of community transmission uh
in the
24 hours to 8 pm all of them on the
northern beaches and all of them
obviously associated in one way or
another with the avalon cluster and dr
chant will provide some further detail
around that and whilst we're seeing the
trends go the way we hope they do
there are still too many concerning
aspects
of us of those cases and also
of not really being able to identify
what we call the intermediaries those
unlinked cases
for us to release restrictions in the
way that we know the northern beaches
community wanted us to do so
so firstly i'll start to talk about new
year's eve arrangements
as you know previously we'd allocated
spots along the foreshore for frontline
workers from across the state to be able
to come and enjoy the fireworks
unfortunately we're going to have to
cancel that
we think it's too much of a health risk
having people from the regions and from
sydney
and from broader regional areas
congregate all in the cbd and the advice
to date has to all of us being
try to avoid the cbd and so on new
year's eve
we're going to say to those frontline
workers we're previously invited
we'll find another opportunity during
the year to recognise what you've done
so on new year's eve we don't want
any crowds on the foreshores around
sydney whatsoever
however if you have a booking for a
restaurant or another hospitality venue
so long as the four square metre rule is
in place
and those venues have covert safe plans
and you have a permit from service new
south wales
you will be allowed into those venues in
the cbd if you're someone who lives in
the cbd
and has some people over to your home
that is allowed but you can't have more
than 10 people in your home
so those restrictions that apply for
broader sydney apply to the cbd
obviously on new year's eve as well
so unless you have a permit to go to
someone's home with not more than 10
people
or you have a permit from service new
south wales to attend a hospitality
venue
nobody should be in the cbd at all
and that is our strong message all of us
no matter where we are in new south
wales or australia in the world for that
matter can enjoy the seven minute
display from home and that is the safest
way uh this year to enjoy the fireworks
or i should say from television because
you might be
at someone else's home and i'll explain
what those restrictions are
for areas outside the cbd so
to all the frontline workers who would
previously allowed those passes to
thousands of your four or five thousand
of you on the foreshore unfortunately
we'll have to
we'll have to pick a different time
different way to thank you but i do want
to take this opportunity to say you're
in the top of our minds and thoughts
we still have fires from last year we
haven't been able to thank properly
and obviously all our frontline health
workers teachers
and police and other frontline workers
we're going to recognize
we will do so in a different way during
2021.
in relation to regional new south wales
restrictions
beyond the 30th of december remain
unchanged
remember yesterday and the day before dr
chant and i had
spoken about what things looked like
until the 30th of december so for
regional new south wales nothing changes
arrangements are the same
for greater sydney nothing changes the
arrangements are the same so on new
year's eve you can't have more than 10
people in your home that includes
children
so you can have up to 10 people in your
home if you're from greater sydney
but no more than that however we are
reducing
outdoor gatherings to 50 rather than 100
across the board when i say across the
board i mean greater sydney
so at this point in time you could have
an outdoor gathering of 100 we're
reducing that to 50 so it means if you
want to have an outdoor barbecue or an
outdoor picnic
you can do so up to 50 people but
remember
that means you have to be socially
distanced and what police and our health
authorities don't want to see
is those groups of 50s suddenly
converging and becoming hundreds so
uh we're okay with you so long as you're
socially distancing having an outdoor
gathering of 50 in greater sydney
but make sure make sure that those
groups of 50 don't converge and within
those groups of 50 that you have good
social distancing because what we don't
want to see is too much mingling
within households that aren't socially
distance and that's
the message for greater sydney moving
forward in terms of the restrictions
for the northern beaches community
firstly can we thank you all for your
patience and of course minister hazard
who happens to be a member of the
northern beaches uh community will
provide um some further reflection and
comment
but if you are in the northern part of
the northern beaches in the northern
zone of the northern beaches around the
avalon cluster
unfortunately the stay-at-home
provisions will be staying in place
until the 9th of january
and that's because of the number of
active cases we have the number of
people we have in isolation and the
concentration of cases and also the fact
that we still haven't found
the real root cause of how the virus
actually got
to the avalon rsl so for those reasons
unfortunately the state home provisions
will be in place for the northern zone
of the northern beaches however
on new year's eve you will have some
relief you'll be able to have up to five
people
into your home including children but
again they have to be
from the northern zone they have to be
from north of the nuremberg bridge
and west or and east of the baja temple
so please know you can have up to five
people in your home
during new year's eve but they have to
be from that zone
and outside of that we're still going to
allow you to have
five people at public gatherings outdoor
gatherings
during the entire time until the 9th of
january so stay at home provisions that
you're all used to now
are in place with the exception of new
year's eve where you can have five
people into your home
but on every other day you can have five
people outdoors but we don't want anyone
outside of the household coming into
your home apart from new year's eve and
can i be very clear about that
it's really important to keep households
separate when we've got such a high
concentration of cases
active cases and also people in
isolation and that's just to keep
everybody
safe and we appreciate the frustration
um that many of you are experiencing but
if we ask you to do the hard yards now
we're
confident that we'll be able to regain
normality much sooner than anticipated
given where the thing
where the cases are going and how the
strategy is actually unfolding
so for those reasons the state home
provisions in the northern zone will be
in place until
the 9th of january with the exception of
new year's eve where you can have five
people into your home and also outdoor
gatherings
during that entire period until the
ninth of january you can have five
people
outside the home as well in relation to
the southern bit
of the northern beaches now i appreciate
the southern part of the northern
beaches
doesn't have as high number of
concentration of cases
so we are still going to have to ask you
to have the stay-at-home provisions
until the 2nd of january
on new year's eve however you will be
allowed to have 10 people into your home
but unlike christmas those 10 people
includes children
and it also means they have to be from
your zone from the southern part of the
northern beaches we don't want people
moving in and out of the area
for the next few days we want to keep
the areas separate to make sure that any
untraced
chains of community transmission have
actually been clamped down that any
unchanged
traces or unlinked cases can be
identified and and those links
eventually found so for the southern
part or the southern zone of the
northern beaches we're asking you to
have the stay-at-home provisions till
the 2nd of january
however on new year's eve you're able to
have 10 people into your home from your
zone
and outside of that until the 2nd of
january you still can have outdoor
gatherings of 10 people so if you want
to have a picnic
or take the children to the playground
or have a barbecue outdoors
you can have groups of 10 people but
again we don't want to see convergence
of those groups of 10 so
that's what gives us concern when too
much mingling is happening between
households that's when the health
experts get concerned about
potential um outbreaks of the virus so
again
we're deeply grateful for your support
we're deeply grateful for your patience
and we appreciate frustration levels are
increasing but this is to keep you safe
and everybody else safe
and we're going to reevaluate on the
morning of the second what happens in
that southern zone
of the northern beaches beyond the 2nd
of january so
our ultimate aim is to make that zone
part of greater sydney as soon as
possible so we'll have a conversation
with the health experts on the morning
of the second
to see to what extent we can ease
restrictions there will be an easing of
restrictions from the third
but what that looks like yet is yet to
be determined and we'll know on the
morning of the second what the third of
january looks like for the southern bit
of the northern beaches but for the rest
of us there is a degree of certainty now
moving forward for greater sydney
nothing changes
for the regions nothing changes for the
northern part of the northern beaches
nothing changes until
the end of the 9th of january and for
the southern part
of the northern beaches until the second
we're asking you to stay at home and
keep the current arrangements in place
with the exception of new year's eve
when you can have 10 people from the
region into your home
but we're hoping from the 3rd of january
that you will feel some relief and what
that relief looks like
we'll be able to tell you on the morning
of the second so we can confidently say
that there will be some relief for you
the stay at home won't be what it looks
like today from the third of january
but to the extent of it we'll be able to
tell you on the morning of the second
but obviously our aim is to incorporate
that southern zone of the northern
beaches into greater sydney as soon as
possible and that's the next logical
step for us
but we'll want to wait a few more days
to make sure the virus
any any unexpected consequences of the
current cluster
haven't emerged now we appreciate
again the sensitivities around new
year's eve so we're trying to be as
generous as possible
but again we don't want to create any
super spreading events
on new year's eve which then ruins it
for everybody
across the state moving forward again
can i say to people please reduce your
mobility don't move around
unless you absolutely have to don't
travel around unless you absolutely have
to
we appreciate people have made
arrangements and you can maintain those
arrangements outside of the northern
beaches so long as you're
applying common sense you're reducing
any level of exposure and you're being
sensible about the way in which
you and your family are covered safe
i'll ask now
dr chant to give her medical update dr
um minister he's almost a doctor
minister hazard will
comment on the northern beaches in
particular and and then we'll take your
questions thank you
thank you premiere so new south wales
recorded five new locally acquired cases
of code in the 24 hours to 8pm
of these four are linked to the avalon
cluster and is one is linked to a
previously reported case
whose source is still under
investigation but that person lived
within the avalon beach area there are
so in summary there are four household
contacts and one case that was
associated with a
venue the rose at erskineville there
were nine new cases were acquired
overseas bringing the total number of
cases to 4683
the testing levels were moderate at 15
364. and can i please urge the community
come forward for testing
having those high testing levels those
incredibly high testing levels before
the christmas period gave us a great
confidence that we were diagnosing cases
rapidly
and it allowed us to better understand
the scope of the
outbreak so can i urge everyone
including those in the northern beaches
in both zones to come forward for
testing with the most minimal of
symptoms
but my plea extends across the state
please come forward
it is critical to us understanding this
current cluster
and it is also important to state that
if you get a tested today and you're
negative
and you get symptoms or different
symptoms emerge
um a week later you need to get retested
even several a few days later please it
would get retested
it is critical the test just tells you
about your status on
one particular day it doesn't give you
an indication or assurance that you're
not going to be positive in the future
in terms of the venues and cases of note
i just wanted to again
thank the community around the belrose
hotel and also thank that establishment
for its cooperation in our
investigations
but anyone who attended the bel rose
hotel at any time in december
and had symptoms that could be
compatible with covert we're asking you
to come forward for testing
this is part of the detective work to
better understand how the cluster has
emerged in the northern beaches
the belrose hotel has not yet been
linked to the avalon cluster
but there are now three cases that have
attended this venue
the firefighter i talked about yesterday
a hotel staff member
and a person who visited the drive
through and so because of those
investigations and because one of those
cases had a very early onset
estimated to be around the 10th of
december we are looking
at the bill rose to give us some
information about those potential
missing links i would also
like to reiterate the fact that we do
know that there were some exposures in
the central business district so
of the cbd but the cbd more broadly so
if you had been in the cbd
in that period please again have a very
low threshold for testing
and come forward for testing that will
assist us in making sure that we haven't
had
seeding events outside the northern
beaches
thank you
thanks gary um i'd like to stress
to all the residents across the new
south wales that you should make
yourself
aware of the zone you're in effectively
we have
the regional area we have the greater
sydney area and then we have the
northern part
of the north of the northern beaches and
the southern
part of the northern beaches each one
has different requirements
i want to stress that the requirements
are based on our health advice from dr
chan
and her public health team they're
designed to keep us safe
they're not designed to be restrictive
they're designed to just make sure that
we're all safe and we're keeping our
families and our friends and our
community safe so
please familiarize yourself with the
restrictions that apply to your
particular area
for the northern beaches can i say that
obviously as a local
i want to emphasize that it is so
important
to the residents of the northern zone
and the southern zone that they keep
within
their zones it is crucial that you do
not leave those areas unless you really
have to
and unless it's authorized by the public
health orders
can i say even if it is authorized by
the public health orders unless it's
crucial
don't don't move out of the zone stay in
the zone
one of the factors that's been raised
with me is that some people
in the northern zone think that they can
go shopping
in the southern zone well technically
you might be able to
practically it is extremely dangerous
for you to do that in the current
situation
so my request my imploring to residents
of the
northern part of the northern beaches is
go shopping local locally
shop locally you've got plenty of shops
there you've got worrywood square for
the bigger
requirements but you can certainly get
everything you need
north of narrowben bridge for those in
the southern
zone of the northern beaches again
you've got
shops locally everywhere you've got also
the major we're in the mall
if you're looking for fish you can go
where i go to go down to harris farm
at north manly but stay in your zone
you do not need to get out of the zone
i want to stress that new year's eve is
going to look a little bit different
for residents particularly on the
northern beaches
but as the premier has indicated there
will be
some capacity to have some people come
to your house
five including children in the northern
part of the northern beaches
and ten in the southern part of the
northern beaches
many of us who would be having friends
around might be thinking about
doing the cooking or the food
preparation ourselves i would encourage
you to think about
if there are businesses in your local
area that are going to provide takeaway
think about taking taking getting a take
out for new year's eve
because there will be businesses
hopefully that will see the opportunity
to be able to not just give away not
just give take take away coffees and
what have you but also look at what they
were doing
in previous periods in this in the phase
that we've had this last year and that
is providing takeaway food so
i encourage businesses to think about
that that is make available take away
food for
new year's eve and the celebration
surrounding that
but also i encourage locals to think
about getting a
i supposed to take out messages get some
takeout
if the local businesses are providing it
that will keep our local businesses
supported
finally i want to say this one january
um now one of the i
i have spent time with our tracing teams
and the frustration that they have in
not being able to track
who has been where is just enormous
that puts us all at risk as of 1 january
or all businesses are required to have
the service new south wales
qr code i want to stress that you have a
quieter period right now
to get on to doing that and you need to
do it quite apart for anything else
even if you don't want to do it out of
goodwill there is a 5 000
5000 fine attached if you don't have
those
uh service new south wales qr codes by
the first of january so
i stress both from the sense of good
will
and fellowship to your community get it
done service new south wales qr code
but if you're not so inclined to be that
uh that way
then there's a 5 000 phone on the back
of it so please get on with that right
now thank you
dr chant um can we just clarify the the
case
of the hotel worker at the belrose hotel
do you believe that that worker is the
the earliest
known case involving the avalon cluster
how sure are you
and and what are you doing to try and go
back from there
look we're also pursuing other people as
part of the cluster
that have had early onsets of illness
can i just say this is
quite challenging because as you know
the symptoms of covert are quite mild
and so
if someone's feeling a little bit of a
fatigued after a shift
after a shift long shift at work is that
covert or is it not so
but we are following up a couple of
other people that might have had
early onsets but that also hasn't led us
anywhere so this is the
the sort of strongest indication because
we have both
a good history from both the person and
supported by
a mother and also the
issue that the laboratory testing on the
serology
very much shows that it's consistent
with a two to three week
prior to the person being tested so
again those two pieces of information
really are quite strong and and justify
the focus we're having on the hotel to
look at
whether find the links but also to just
be sure that we haven't had any other
established
chains of transmission i would want to
say thank you to this
young man and also acknowledge um
that he's his level of cooperation has
been um
great but also the fact that just to
confirm he hasn't
um spread it to anyone that we know
about his close contacts but obviously
we take a precautious
approach and we know there were some
positive people around he obviously got
it from someone
and because we don't know who that was
we need to be careful in that broader
community around that bill rose davis
scenario do you think he's picked it up
at the pub we don't no obviously that's
one line of inquiry and that's why we're
asking anyone who's been in that
pub since the whole of december um
remembering the 14 day incubation period
if he got sick around the 10th
it's some time before that in terms of
early december he got some time in
december he's likely to have been
exposed to it
how many unlinked cases mystery cases
are there now
and how does it compare to the
crossroads hotel cluster in terms of
you know how worrying it is in how many
cases
so let me just talk about unlinked cases
because um
i think that we just need to run through
that if that's okay
um so there are some unlinked cases
associated
where people are actually residing in in
avalon beach they may have gone
or um palm beach so they're residing in
that area where we know there were lots
of positive people around
we haven't managed to pinpoint them
being at a particular venue
or setting or crossing over with a known
case
but we know that there is there is
community transmission
or was community transmission for a
period in that area just because of the
numb
vast numbers of people that were
positive that were present in that area
then there are cases that raise more
concern which are those cases
that we actually don't know
that weren't related to the northern
area of the northern beaches
so there i think i went through them
yesterday um we have got the gentleman
from bondi and we did have an expert
panel
meet yesterday afternoon and they've
indicated
that they can't exclude that the
diagnosis in that
case and so the case as well as their
contacts will be in isolation
and we'll be managing that as as if it's
a positive covert case
we will be doing some further blood
tests on that
gentleman and that will occur just again
to help us
clarify the diagnosis but the experts
have said we've got to treat that as a
case and we are
and can i extend my appreciation to that
case and also the contacts so there's
that gentleman
there's also a gentleman that's gone
into um
manly and as a team works in an
educational facility
in manly we again are tracking down
whether there was crossover in
in train routes or if um
how he got into his work and also
looking at whether there are any
colleagues that might have been from the
northern end of the northern beaches so
that's still under investigation
we've got the gentleman that um spent
some time in the cbd and i think i've
mentioned on a number of occasions the
fact that they've
been a few infectious cases in that sort
of chifley
square mlc area and that's another case
that is
unlinked obviously the 20 year old we
don't know the source of
and the firefighter who i mentioned
yesterday
so would you say that this has been more
challenging in terms of contact racing
compared to the crossroads hotel cluster
what are your thoughts in comparing the
two
look i think we've actually learnt a lot
the teams have actually learned a lot
from the crossroads time about
covet and how it spreads i think it's
been great to have the qr codes and some
of those systems
in in place we've also
um i just want to acknowledge the
community um so whilst we did see
very high levels and and again the
southwestern sydney community was just
superb in response to crossroads
coming out and those cues i still
remember them we've seen a similar
response in the northern beaches
community very high rates of testing
and again that gives us confidence
because it means that we really know
what the status of people
are more rapidly i've talked to you
before about the fact that
getting people tested as they go into
isolation is really critical because it
buys us time in doing that further
contact
tracing so for me it's a very different
situation
but equally as challenging and i think
you can see
now that the context we're in where we
have
no community transmission
in many other states and territories and
we had achieved no community
transmission
it means that we're in a setting where
we really want to work hard to get to
know community transmission
i think it's important to know that when
crossroads occurred at that time
there were large numbers of cases in
victoria
and hence that posed additional
challenges where
notwithstanding borders were introduced
no border is a
absolute barrier we have to have people
traveling for critical reasons and
essential reasons so there was always a
risk of a
reseeding event and now
we are you know as i said working as
hard as we can and
working with the community and business
to achieve that no community
transmission
he can't link the belrose hotel with the
avalon
specifically but he's still confident
that they'd go together that there is
some
we will be awaiting the genome
sequencing so that gives us one other
piece of the puzzle so if the genomes
all match
then again that tells us it's associated
with it
um but what we're trying to do with our
epidemiology
is just find whom who who spread it to
whom
in a nice linear line
but as i said there was clearly some
evidence of
cases in that northern beaches area in
the northern area
where there are geographically linked
cases that hadn't crossed over with
positive cases
but that's to be perfectly frank not
unexpected given
the number of cases in that um
geographical area dr trump wasn't the
right decision to open the beaches
um in that southern zone of the northern
beaches considering we saw so many
people
there yesterday so just to be clear
outdoor environments are actually
much safer than indoor environments we
have asked people
put limits on on gathering sizes and we
do ask the community to make sense keep
away from other groups
household groups who it's actually
better for household groups to be
spending time
outdoors than in indoors and we know
that household
like contact is the greatest so we are
trying to balance
everything but the message is please
even over the new years if you can
actually
eat your new year's celebrations on an
open
veranda outdoor barbecues
please keep people out of indoor spaces
and if you are in indoor spaces
um you know please wear a mask in those
settings where you're traveling on
public transport or in
in other settings
can i just ask just to clarify new
year's eve obviously it's talking about
the cbd and the portfolio there but
there's other areas behind it
perfect yeah i forgot to mention that
actually it's a good question um we're
saying to local council areas
your local government who may have uh
organized events for new year's eve
unless it's controlled ticketed and
seated
we don't recommend those events going on
now health had already provided that
advice to local councils so
some of the functions that have been
organized in the suburbs and in
surrounding local council areas
had already managed to have events which
are ticketed
seated controlled with good records of
who's coming in and out now if the
councils can guarantee that that's a
matter for them
but certainly we can't guarantee that in
the cbd and we don't think it's safe to
have
so many people congregate from all over
the state in the sydney cbd given what's
happening
which is why we've abandoned our plans
in terms of any
for sure viewing of the fireworks from
the sydney cbd
so that won't be allowed but certainly
if councils can guarantee
a ticketed controlled covert safe event
with people coming in and out and many
of those events are family focused and
finish at 9 30 or 10 o'clock
health is still okay for that to proceed
but please make sure that it's extra
covered safe so
again if it's a controlled ticketed
seated event
with good records of who's coming in and
out and also staggered times for people
coming in and out
i mean it's almost almost difficult to
say this but often getting to and from
an event
is more risky than actually being at the
event because you don't want large
numbers of people all arriving somewhere
at the same time all departing at the
same time so we want anyone
any local government areas who are
considering continuing their events
their community events to make sure they
consider staggered times for coming and
going
to make sure that it's sitting we don't
want no matter where you are
as difficult as it is on new year's eve
mingling
singing dancing these are all highly
contagious ways of spreading the virus
and dr chant can
speak at greater length and greater
expertise than me but
please know that singing dancing
speak even speaking loudly and mingling
um really accelerate
the virus spreading and we ask everybody
please be sensible this year we know
it's not the new years that all of us
hoped it would be
but that's okay we want 2021 to be much
better than 2020. for 2021 to be much
better than 2020 all of us have to be
that extra covert safe but we are giving
direction to local government areas
outside of the cbd
to say those events can continue so long
as they respect
the for you know the the various um per
person requirements uh the outdoor
settings obviously
no indoor settings controlled seated
ticket events with good records of who's
coming in now
groups of 50 gathering outside obviously
not at those ticket events but also
that seems quite risky and sort of
against the years well no
actually it's consistent with the health
advice it's actually the health advice
and i would prefer dr
chan to give that answer to make sure
people know we've based that on health
advice
outdoor settings are safe so long as you
maintain social distancing and so long
as the groups are 50
don't converge with each other so
we've reduced that from 100 to 50 for
greater sydney obviously on the northern
beaches it's 5 or 10 depending on where
you live so can i be
very clear about that on the northern
beaches you can't congregate outdoors in
groups of more than 5 or 10 depending on
where you live
in greater sydney it's 50 and obviously
for the regions
they don't have any any of that impulse
but i'll i will ask dr chan to talk
about
the group book the group outdoor
gatherings of 50 and why that seemed to
be safe under certain
circumstances so the risk was much
greater say you had for instance six
people in your house and you had where
like permitted 10 visitors that's
a large number indoor environments are
particularly risky so by the time you
have a long duration
of time indoors outdoor so what we want
to do is
to some extent incentivize people to go
outdoors and so if you can
have a barbecue or
go to a park or you've got an area that
a reserve
that is a safer environment than having
people congregate
this is a balancing risk and we ask the
community to to be sensible
we are saying that at this time wherever
possible if it's not important to you
that you have a large event
please defer it delay defer delay that
would be my
my message to you but if it is important
to you
then these are the rules and please try
and stay outdoors maintain that social
distancing
but my other message is if you have the
mildest of symptoms
do not attend any of those events
whether they're indoors and outdoors
the last thing you want to do is be
responsible for
spreading our clothes to your loved ones
and the broader
so we're community going to have the
green and
yellow zones in place but the people in
the in the green zone the only people
that will be allowed in there are
residents
and people who have a restaurant booking
and have a permit is that right
that is absolutely the case you cannot
come to the cbd
on new year's eve unless you have a
booking
from a hospitality venue but even if you
have a booking you have to get a permit
through service new south wales to prove
that you've got that booking
so you have to go to service new south
wales if you expect to come to the cbd
so all hospitality venues though can i
stress will be subject to the four
square meter rule
not the two square meter rule when we
first announced uh this
obviously that was different but all
hospitality venues will be subject to
the four square metre rule in the sydney
cbd
outdoors and indoors that means you need
a permit from service new south wales to
prove you've got a booking at a venue
and if you live in the cbd you're
allowed to have up to 10 people in your
home
but those 10 people have to have a
permit through service new south wales
and you need to log in if you live in
the cbd you need to log in with service
new south wales
and provide the names of the 10 people
coming to your home we apologize that we
have to be so strict but this is to keep
everybody
safe you can't just because you feel
like it
jump on a bus or a train and come to the
cbd on new year's eve that's not the go
you have to be going to a specific
location
or being a resident of the cbd again
apologies for being so strict
but we want to make sure that we don't
have a super spreading event on new
year's eve which then spoils it for
everybody across the state
i'll get to all of them don't worry
there are a lot of other spots
around the harbour foreshore for example
on the northern side
where there might not be ticketed events
but usually
people families would go and pack out
all of the parkland surrounding the
foreshore
now will that be allowed or are you well
that's why similar to the question we
received before the only
way you will be allowed to access those
commonly frequented
for sure venues if if there is a formal
event or
formal uh level of organization provided
by the local council
so if the local council deems it
appropriate to have a
ticketed seated controlled event you
will be allowed to participate in that
but you cannot just
unfortunately pick up and go along to
those frequently
attended venues without being part of an
organised ticketed controlled seated
event and local those areas are
obviously controlled by local
governments so we've sent strong
direction today
and will be to local councils saying you
can only
allow public access to those areas if
you've at an event
that's ticketed controlled and seated
and has good records of people coming in
and out so if you can satisfy those
those covert safe regulations or covert
safe
plans you can proceed with the event but
our strong advice to families and
communities is
we cannot have people congregate in
those large numbers we normally see
along those foreshore areas
we do recommend very strongly that
people watch the fireworks on tv
or go to a local venue outdoors which
does not is not on the foreshore and
doesn't have that cramped crowding
so we're just asking everybody to be to
be safe and use their common sense and
can i say what makes our team
team new south wales incredibly proud is
that people have been demonstrating in
the main good common sense yes there are
exceptions and it's so
annoying and frustrating when we see
people doing the wrong thing but they
are the exception the vast majority of
our residents
are using their common sense being
covered safe looking up the the
regulations and the advice and following
them
and we ask everybody to apply that same
level of common sense
on new year's eve now we have been very
strict with the cbd we've been very
clear on what we'll be allowing local
councils to do but at the end of the day
it's their call if they can't manage a
covert safe event i'd recommend they
don't proceed with it
it's better not to if you can't
guarantee a covert safe event
it's better not to proceed with it but
that's a matter for them but we do ask
them to review their plans and if they
have any questions they should contact
our health experts who are always
available to provide advice on those
plans do not
think you can come into the cbd unless
you have a permit
now this makes the job of our police
much easier but it also means
police and i and i say this to
businesses because we know you're doing
it tough
but this also means there's more police
freed up to monitor compliance
if you're at a pub in the cbd on new
year's eve you cannot be standing up and
mingling and police there'll be more
police presence
to ensure that we don't have a super
spreading event
so we appreciate what new year's eve
looks like if you don't feel you can
adhere to
to a covered safe news either one of
these venues would prefer you didn't
turn up because uh police will be out in
force and rather than have to police
thousands of people on the foreshores we
will be asking police to have extra
compliance responsibilities on yeezy to
make sure
all businesses and their patrons are
doing the right thing the vast majority
are but we just can't see scenes of
people
especially after having a few drinks
just getting up and mingling and
deciding they want to give everybody a
kiss and a hug on new year's eve as
difficult as that is
we ask people to refrain because that
could be a super spreading event
especially in the cbd
and for the restrictions on the north
beaches given that it's
allowing 10 people to gather outdoors
this could lead to
are you concerned that this could lead
to a number of people all going to the
beach everybody in parks
all on the waterfront and therefore
having a lot of people well that's why
that's why we've said already and if you
note um some weeks ago we'd already
launched our plans for a covered safe
summer so we're asking specifically
social distancing
everybody knows the one and a half uh
meter distance but also that the groups
of ten
on the northern beaches don't converge
with other groups of ten and that's
really the important message we are
allowing
outdoor gatherings of tenant as dr
chance says all the time
outdoor gatherings are much safer and
less likely to transmit the virus than
indoor settings
so if the weather is is fine and you
want to
spend new year's eve outdoors that is
recommended
we only insist that those groups of ten
don't converge with each other
so that you have a massive number of
people all mingling together the key
issue is
to have to reduce as far as possible and
dr chan interrupt and correct me
at any stage but to reduce as far as
possible households mingling with each
other obviously when you live in the
same household
you're with each other all the time but
our aim is to have as little
household interaction with each other as
possible
try and reduce your activity as much as
possible but we're also realistic and we
appreciate
what time of year it is and so what
we're doing is providing a safe way that
you can enjoy new year's eve
without risking transmission of the
virus or transmitting it to your loved
ones i mean i worry about that all the
time and as i think i've mentioned a few
times i haven't hugged my parents since
february
that's just me but everybody will make
their own assessments about how they
treat the vulnerable members of their
family
how they conduct their own activity what
changes you might make to your plans
we've tried to provide this is the
balance we've tried to provide as much
notice as possible but also
make the decision as late as possible so
that we have the best data available
and given the information we have to
date and the risks that are posed
uh we believe the settings we've put in
place are the safest for everybody
i'll come back to you in a second 21 is
fast approaching and you have previously
said that all hospitality venues and
also hairdressers
will be asked to use the service new
south wales qr code just to clarify
does that mean it will be mandatory yes
so what we are saying that from the
first of january we want there to be
compulsory use of the new south wales or
the service new south wales
app when it comes to qr codes so just to
explain
until this point in time we had given
businesses the option of using their own
qr codes or using the service new south
wales one
but as the minister for health has
highlighted us as dr chant
that hasn't always given our health
officials the best and most accurate
information to make those contact
tracing phone calls or
to push out those sms messages because
unfortunately
the service new south wales app firstly
i'll say the service new south wales app
is more accurate because you only have
to put in your details once
and every time you go into a venue you
just click on the click on the
code and you're automatically checked in
for the businesses that aren't on that
app you've literally got to
put in your details every single time
people get frustrated don't fill out all
their details or else they make stuff up
they don't talk about their dependents
but the service new south wales
app is easier to use for us and it's
more accurate because you only need to
put in your information once
and you can obviously we rely on that
but we found
those venues that use the service new
south wales app has made life so much
easier for our health contact
traces this is to help our contact
tracers who are working 24 7. can i
stress that i'm not just saying it it's
the truth
our contact traces are working 24 7.
some people are getting results from
tests from labs
or getting calls in the middle of the
night because we are
this is a 24 7 operation to get us to
where we are
and their job will be made a million
times easier
if businesses get on the service new
south wales qr code system
rather than their own choice and that's
why it is so
important we've given businesses plenty
of time in fact i'm told that it takes
about three to four minutes tops
for a business to download uh the
service new south wales app and as a
user
i don't know about all of you but for me
it's much easier going into a venue
that has a service new south wales app
because all you do is literally click on
your phone and press a button as opposed
to having to put in your details
every single time you go to a venue that
is why it's really important for
businesses to get on board because it
means
the context the contact traces those
health experts that are working around
the clock
can be assured imagine i'll give you
another example to demonstrate why this
is so important
if we have a venue where there's um
saying greater sydney where there's 200
people
even if 150 people have done the right
thing and 50 people haven't that's 50
people out there with the virus
potentially spreading it around and not
knowing it
but if you have a service new south
wales app and everybody and the person
the covered safe marshal at that
restaurant says or the
or the venue says can you show me the
tick before you walk in
you know that everybody in there's been
logged on it takes health minutes to get
that message out to everybody who was
there at a particular time
now that increases the accuracy and our
ability to get
control of the virus but even if a
couple of people don't do the right
thing and they have the virus they could
be spreading it in the community without
knowing that's why it's so important to
have the service new south wales up we
did try and give it a go by giving
businesses the option
but we found the inaccuracy or the lack
of consistency compared to the service
new south wales app is too much the gap
is too big which is why now we need
everybody on the service new south wales
app it only takes a few minutes
uh no excuses so we're encouraging
businesses to think about that and be
ready for 2021.
exactly so you're next yeah
death i will ask dr chant to provide
information on that all i know it was a
case from back in march but i'll allow
dr chant to yeah
so this was a gentleman in his 70s who
died on the 21st of december
from respiratory complications throwing
pulling
infection diagnosed in a march he was a
household contact for locally acquired
case
and although his death is considered to
be related to covert so that's based on
the doctors
completing a death certificate as to the
cause of death
he had recently tested negative and was
no longer infectious and posed no
risk to the community and i think this
um highlights the fact that
sometimes the complications can be so
severe
that on the lung damage and other
complications arising from covert
that that can subsequently be the cause
of death many months
later what area was you from uh look
we're not releasing that information um
specifically i will check with the
family we obviously want to protect the
families privacy this is a very
difficult time for them
um it was a locally acquired case
and um but look if we are able to give
out any more
information we will do so
no it's not linked to the northern
beaches
yes he will be included and i think in
today's press release we
um the numbers are increased to 56.
there's obviously been a bit of pressure
to ease those restrictions can you
explain why you
can't ease them until or won't look at
it till january the second
we are pushing to no community
transmission so we are wanting to
um stop this covert in its tracks
and therefore we need to be very
cautious
we know that the northern end of the
northern beaches is an area where
there is much greater risk but we also
have many contacts that live within
close contacts that live within the
southern end
and we also know the way that movement
comes up and down that peninsula
there is a lot of mixing of people from
within the northern and
the southern zones in the usual course
so when we haven't identified all the
roots of transmission in the northern
the concerns we've got is that those
people may have come into the southern
it's really pleasing to see the high
rates of testing and that's given
us a lot of confidence that we're not
missing too much disease
but we really want to get not risk
any loss of control of this covert
response so
i just want to say thank you to the
people of the northern beaches
i know we've been asking a lot of you at
this time
we've tried to modify some of the
restrictions to
allow you to enjoy those outdoor
environments for exercise
and recreation we're urging you to come
forward to get testing and in terms
of the southern zone um the more testing
numbers i can
see the uh the greater confidence we'll
have that we're not missing undiagnosed
disease and then that will inform our
advice uh to the premier on the 2nd of
january the morning of the second of
january do you have any advice
for people in greater sydney who spent
time in that southern zone over the
christmas period should they be
following those stay at home as much as
you can orders and instructions
that's right so anyone who um has been
into the zone um who spent
christmas and we know that many people
again a big thank you to
everyone the feedback i've had is many
people
chose to limit their gatherings or to
not have people
in from outside even though they were
permitted to do so
everyone needs who has been spent some
time in there
needs to be cautious particularly if the
family you visited
experiences any ill health makes in
terms of covert symptoms pleases a
precaution
isolate yourself until that person has a
negative result
it's incredibly important that we do all
we can to achieve no community
transmission
can i just clarify on new year's eve
i'm just thinking there are probably
hundreds of parks
and vantage points for clues dramoine
north sydney we're talking a lot of
people would normally be there so
whose job will it be to enforce no one's
to go to those areas will it will that
councils have to fence them off what can
i police patrol how will it
look like can i can i be very clear
there will be obviously
the local spots where ordinarily
thousands of people would gather now
that can't happen
so most councils whether it's the inner
west north sydney
uh or other councils or waverly council
had already put in plans to have
controlled
covert safe events even councils like
fairfield council
at the show ground had already organised
to have covert safe
seated controlled events those events
can still proceed
so long as they stick to the rules so
long as there's good record keeping so
long as they're controlled seated and
ticketed events
and that people stagger the time they
come in and go out and that's up to the
councils to monitor
but if there's a local park or a local
venue that some people go to to look at
the fireworks or to have a picnic
that is okay so long as everybody is
covered safe if it's not the regular
big foreshore area but you might have an
oval sometimes there's ovals across
sydney which might have access
to viewing that is okay so long as you
stick to groups of
depending on where you are gatherings of
no more than five or ten if you're on
the northern beaches
larger ones are allowed in greater
sydney but please exercise
common sense what is a concern is when
the various groups converge and form big
groups we don't want to see any of that
but we just ask you to exercise common
sense if there's an oval at the end of
your street which people normally go to
and you can maintain social distancing
stick to the covered rules that is okay
but for the larger
venues the foreshore venues where
thousands of people would normally
converge with no social distancing
that is not on and councillors have
already put in covert safe plans
for new year's eve we ask council to to
refine those plans
to update those plans to get in touch
with our health authorities if they have
any concerns
but those i think we can all tell the
difference between those major areas
where thousands of people would normally
converge
versus the local park or the local oval
that might have access we just ask
people there's always a degree of common
sense
i think people know themselves when
they're doing the right thing and when
they're not
and yes we ask for everybody's
cooperation we've tried to make the
rules as black and white as possible
but we also appreciate that it comes
down to common sense and it comes down
to locals knowing their own local
community but can i stress dr chan's
advice it's much safer
to be outdoors socially distance in the
group number you're allowed to have
rather than being indoors because
indoors is where the virus is more
likely to spread
and can i also say to everybody when the
clock ticks over to midnight
from the 31st of december to the 1st of
january i know that's normally an
emotional time where we like to kiss and
hug everybody around us can i just ask
for absolute restraint
obviously your household is okay but um
please be
you know please be restrained because
the more restrained we are
at midnight the better 2021 will be for
all of us
and can i please thank everybody
involved in dealing with this current
outbreak first and foremost the public
the public has been amazing especially
in the northern beaches the testing
rates have been
beyond our expectations and we need to
maintain them especially over christmas
they've been
phenomenal and we want to maintain them
can i thank the public especially the
public of the northern beaches for your
cooperation and
support can i thank our health workers
the the people taking the swabs the
pathologists our amazing contact races
and also the associated um organizations
like the police force service new south
wales it's really been
an ongoing team effort and it's been
really great
to see how we've managed the first
couple of days when we're all worried
about where this was going to go to
where we are now
and we don't want it ruined at the last
minute and can i also please extend my
deepest condolences to the family
who lost their loved one today from the
virus acquired back in march
first of all it shows how lethal this
virus is and how our thoughts and
prayers have to be with people who are
really suffering during this time
especially this time of year
so my strongest message is common sense
also needs to prevail yes we've got the
rules in place yes we've got the health
orders in place
but there's also a degree of common
sense and restraint
i know we're capable of it because i've
seen it in bucket loads in the last
little while
and i just asked everybody to continue
that because it makes everybody's job
easier
and it also gives us the best chance of
having a much better and i believe me we
all need a better 2021 i think if we
continue to see those large
in the eastern suburbs like we have in
the last few days is there a chance that
you'll make a snap decision and revert
some of these restrictions to keep
people safe look nothing we do is a snap
decision can i say that everything we do
is considered
but those visuals that we saw were
people doing the wrong thing and police
will be out finding in force now
we never want to use that as our first
option
but people should expect police to be
out there in force
and i think all of us have had a gut
full of people doing the wrong thing
because every
vast majority doing the right thing
thanks everybody
could i just ask you briefly about that
house party at north bondi
and we've now found out that one of the
people that was at bronte
then went on to a an over-the-top
gathering in centennial
what do you make of the 15 pins that
police have handed out since christmas
but clearly that's a matter for police
to determine where appropriate
penalties should be applied but i would
say this that
when when when most of new south wales
indeed most of australia is doing the
right thing i would just say to those
people who are half contemplating doing
anything stupid in the next few days
forget it because you will be the one
who will end up being
fined massively but you may well end up
being the cause
of a super spreading event and then you
will really regret it
just quickly um now that that will be
mandatory for
the service new south wales qr code what
are the fines for businesses
um the fines are generally a thousand
dollars they can be higher though
and they can be sorry five thousand
dollars i should say
five thousand dollars i said that before
actually five thousand dollars
what i would say is that um the
premier's given very good examples of
why it's critical
i'd add one more that some of the
tracers were telling me and that was
that
some of the businesses when they were
contacted simply didn't know
how to get the information off the
platform provider
and that caused massive problems in
delay so there are a whole lot of
reasons why
one january businesses should have a
covered safe plan but also have a
service
new south wales app and if they don't
they run the risk of a five thousand
dollar fine and that's how to keep
people safe thank you
thank you thank you thank you thank you
health minister brad hazard concluding
that news conference there you heard
from the premier
gladys berejiklian five new community
transmission cases in the last 24 hours
all linked to the avalon cluster
and there were 15 364
tests now let's run through the
restrictions for new year's eve for you
in the northern beaches the northern
zone
stay-at-home measures continue till the
9th of january
so that's north of the narrabeen bridge
and east of the baha'i temple
those stay-at-home provisions continue
to the 9th of january the premier says
this decision has been made
given that they haven't found the cause
of how the virus got there
now for new year's eve in the northern
zone of the northern beaches you can
have up to
five people uh from the northern zone
only though
in your home five people at outdoor
gatherings as well
now looking at the southern zone of the
northern beaches the state home orders
will continue until the 2nd of january
the premier says a decision will be made
on that day about what happens
from then onwards and for for new year's
eve in the southern zone
10 people allowed at your home which
includes children
but they must be from the southern zone
now that is different to christmas day
where
people were allowed in so 10 people must
be from your own zone
outdoor gatherings are allowed for 10
people now
dr kerry chance says they are pushing
for no community transmission and that's
why these stay-at-home orders
remain in place in both those northern
beaches zones
for the cbd you must have a permit to go
there you are allowed up to 10 people at
someone's home
and you are allowed at restaurants where
you have bookings and those premises
have existing covert compliance
but again you must apply for a permit
and the government has cancelled the
frontline workers passes to the
foreshore
of sydney harbour there were about four
to five thousand
issued the premier said and they have
been cancelled and the premier's saying
they will need to find another way
to thank frontline workers in 2021.
if you're in regional new south wales
the restrictions are unchanged
and greater sydney arrangements are the
same up to 10 people in your home
and also in greater sydney though the
outdoor gatherings have been reduced
to 50 not 100 anymore so
50 people must be socially distanced as
well
and if you're attending one of those
council events uh around new south wales
and particularly around the greater
sydney region they must be controlled
ticketed
and seated and councils need to
guarantee that they are covered safe
events
let's take a look at the weather now
brisbane mostly sunny
sydney a shower or two canberra a shower
or two and a possible storm
in melbourne it will be partly cloudy in
hobart a possible late shower and
expecting 19 degrees today
adelaide partly cloudy perths will be
sunny
and a top of 34 degrees and darwin a
shower to an a possible thunderstorm
back with more here on abc news in just
a moment
a-league and w league football is on
live and free every single weekend
the rivalries
[Music]
live and free every weekend
on abc and streaming on eye view
this will be a colorful adventure the
most intimate stories
i did not expect to feel this kind of
child like glee
a magical space it's brilliant it's so
silly but i just love it so much
i've been to many wonderful places but
none more extraordinary than here
the slave trade was the main business
still a feeling of anger for me
profound life-changing events this is
incredible anticipation builds
we are one but we are many
and from all the lands on earth we call
we share a dream
we are
[Music]
uh
today sydney's new year's eve plans
cancelled as the state records five more
cases
of cover 19 all in the northern beaches
we're trying to be as generous as
possible but again we don't want to
create any super spreading events
on new year's eve which then ruins it
for everybody
[Music]
european leaders vaccinated live on
television
as the fiesta shots are rolled out
across the eu
after two years of testing the
australian air force is given the green
light to deploy the f-35
and india extends its first innings lead
in the boxing day test
[Music]
hello and welcome to abc news i'm selena
edmonds
the new south wales government has
banned crowds from gathering on sydney
harbour
to watch the new year's eve fireworks up
to a million people traditionally flock
to the city
and harbour vantage points but premier
gladys beragiclien says the covert 19
pandemic
makes it too risky this year mr jiclin
says it's too much of a health risk
for people to come to the cbd and the
harbour for sure
for the fireworks which will still go
ahead
you know previously we'd allocated spots
along the foreshore for frontline
workers from across the state to be able
to come and enjoy the fireworks
unfortunately we're going to have to
cancel that
we think it's too much of a health risk
having people from the regions and from
sydney
and from broader regional areas
congregate all in the cbd
and the advice to date has to all of us
being try to avoid the cbd and so on new
year's eve
we're going to say to those frontline
workers with previously invited
we'll find another opportunity during
the year to recognise what you've done
so on new year's eve we don't want
any crowds on the foreshores around
sydney whatsoever
so unless you have a permit to go to
someone's home with not more than 10
people
or you have a permit from service new
south wales to attend a hospitality
venue
nobody should be in the cbd at all
and that is our strong message all of us
no matter where we are in new south
wales or australia in the world for that
matter can enjoy the seven-minute
display from home and that is the safest
way
this year to enjoy the fireworks or i
should say from television because you
might be
at someone else's home and i'll explain
what those restrictions are
for areas outside the cbd so
to all the frontline workers who would
previously allowed those passes to
thousands of your four or five thousand
of you on the foreshore unfortunately
we'll have to
we'll have to pick a different time
different way to thank you but i do want
to take this opportunity to say you're
in the top of our minds and thoughts
we still have fieries from last year we
haven't been able to thank properly
and obviously all our frontline health
workers teachers
and police and other frontline workers
we're going to recognise
we will do so in a different way during
2021.
in relation to regional new south wales
restrictions
beyond the 30th of december remain
unchanged
remember yesterday and the day before dr
chant and i had
spoken about what things look like until
the 30th of december so for regional new
south wales nothing changes arrangements
are the same
for greater sydney nothing changes the
arrangements are the same so on new
year's eve you can't have more than 10
people in your home that includes
children
so you can have up to 10 people in your
home if you're from greater sydney
but no more than that however we are
reducing outdoor gatherings to 50
rather than 100 across the board when i
say across the board i mean greater
sydney
so at this point in time you could have
an outdoor gathering of 100 we're
reducing that to 50 so it means if you
want to have an outdoor barbecue or an
outdoor picnic
you can do so up to 50 people but
remember
that means you have to believe socially
distance and what police and our health
authorities don't want to see
is those groups of 50s suddenly
converging and becoming hundreds so
uh you're we're okay with you so long as
you're socially distancing having an
outdoor gathering of 50 in greater
sydney
but make sure make sure that those
groups of 50 don't converge and within
those groups of 50 that you have good
social distancing because what we don't
want to see is too much mingling
within households that aren't socially
distance and that's
the message for greater sydney moving
forward in terms of the restrictions
premier gladys barry jiglian speaking
just a short time ago
a mutant strain of covert 19 that's
emerged in the uk
has been detected in south australia sa
health says a return traveler in
adelaide
has been diagnosed with the variant
which is ravaging southeast england
the patient has been transferred to the
royal adelaide hospital for further
treatment
meanwhile two other return travelers
have also returned positive results
but one of the cases is believed to be
an old infection
health experts say astrazeneca's claims
its covert 19 vaccine
is just as effective as those already on
the market needs to be examined closely
the head of the pharmaceutical giant has
pointed to new data
that reportedly shows the jab has the
same efficacy rate
as moderna and pfizer but that
information hasn't been made
public political reporter stephanie
boris joins us from cam
from parliament house in canberra
stephanie uh just what has astrazeneca
had to say about its vaccine
well the ceo of the pharmaceutical
company has said that new data that he's
now
read through shows that the astrozenica
covert 19 vaccine
will be just as effective as those that
are already on the market such as
moderna and
pfizer the ceo has gone on to say that
this new data
shows that the efficacy rate is around
95 percent
like those vaccines already on the
market that are being used in the us and
the uk
but the thing is this data that the ceo
pascal
sorio refers to isn't publicly available
no date has been put on when this data
will be made available and as a result
health experts say we need to be a
little bit skeptical
with the information coming from
astrazeneca given that we can't look at
the figures and the facts ourselves now
as to why australians should care about
what astrazeneca is saying
the federal government has invested
heavily in the astrazeneca
vaccine in fact they've secured nearly
54 million
doses of this particular type of vaccine
most of them will be manufactured here
in australia by csl
if they're given the green light and
also the astrazeneca
vaccine is a lot cheaper than the fizer
vaccine so
different style of vaccine but still it
hasn't got all the
ticks of approval to go ahead just yet
not just in australia but also overseas
stephanie there was data that
astrazeneca released in november
about the trials so how does that relate
to what we're hearing today
so that data released in november was
around initial trials of the astra
zenica covert 19 vaccine and what it
found
in the major trial of thousands of
people was that the
efficacy rate was around 62 once people
had had
two doses of the vaccine uh there was
another smaller trial where people
received half a dose of a vaccine
followed by a full dose and the efficacy
rate there actually was 90 percent
uh now health experts say the
information that came out in november
was
a little bit concluded and convoluted
and confusing and as a result they're
calling on this new data
to be released saying that they need to
look purely through all the details
before making a call on whether
astrazeneca is up to the mark like
pfizer and moderna
when that announcement came out in
november
it was initially seen very good but when
you broke it down and looked at it
they were using different studies and
combining data it was all very odd so i
really would want to make sure that this
time
they've they've got it right now in
terms of a vaccine being rolled out here
in australia whether it's astrazeneca
pfizer or moderna the federal government
here says it's on track to start that
vaccine rollout plan
in march that is low all up to the
therapeutic goods administration that is
the body that is responsible
for determining which medicines and
vaccines are safe to use here in
australia and
while the us and uk are already seeing a
vaccination plan roll out that's because
they're
in more of an emergency than what we're
seeing here in australia their numbers
of covert 19
infections are far higher than what we
have here and so the federal government
saying that
all checks and balances will be
completed before any type of vaccine
is rolled out in australia stephanie
boris joining us there from canberra
the coronavirus vaccine is being given
to millions of people across
europe today as many countries are
struggling with their worst outbreaks
since the start of the pandemic
the ambitious plan to inoculate more
than 450 million people
comes as more than 14 million people
have been infected
across the continent europe
correspondent linton besser reports
ten months after europe's outbreak began
here in cordon oh
italy's ground zero the cavalry has
finally
arrived
we all paramedics doctors and nurses
have worked in a sort of no man's land
not on the front line
but in a no man's land covert 19
was first found here in a 38 year old
man
now there have been 2 million cases in
italy
and 70 000 are dead
the vaccine now represents a light of
hope a reason to look to the future
thinking that we took the right path
towards the solution
from the vatican the pope paid tribute
to those fighting on the front line
i'm also thinking about doctors nurses
and all health workers whose great
commitment
fighting the virus has had significant
repercussions on their family life
27 countries are coordinating a mass
inoculation campaign
for some 450 million people
once enough people have been vaccinated
we can start traveling meeting our
friends and family again
and have normal holidays which we all
long for airports convention centres
and hospital wings have been converted
into immunisation centres
priority is being shown to the elderly
and to hospital workers
if i can contribute i gladly do so i
sort of feel obliged to do so
but europe remains in the grip of a
second wave of infections
and with hospitals under intense strain
european leaders are calling for
patients
the eu has orders for no fewer than two
billion doses of the vaccine and is
determined that this winter
will be its last under lockdown linton
besser
abc news the pandemic has seen most
international tourists barred from
coming to australia
but that hasn't stopped the nt
government signing a new contract to
market the territory
to european tourists reporter jano
gibson joins us from darwin jano how
much is this contract worth and
what's been the reaction to it
yeah good morning selena well the
contract is worth 400 000
over two years and it's been given to a
uk-based company to
promote the territory not only in the
united kingdom but also in germany as
well
plus to provide some trade training to
some of the
local industry stakeholders in those
countries
and as you mentioned in the introduction
there we know that
foreign tourists are generally not
allowed to come to australia at the
moment because of water restrictions set
up
in the wake of the pandemic and the
northern territory opposition
is raising questions about why the
government which is
deeply in debt heading for 8.4 billion
dollars worth of debt this financial
year
why it's spending taxpayer money to
market the territory in countries where
those
tourists aren't even able to come here
at present
yes and well what's the government's
response to this criticism
well the government is defending its
decision to provide this contract
to promote the territory in the european
markets they say that it's vital to
continue the connections with those
local stakeholder groups even while
flights are unable to resume
and they say that once travel can resume
it's important to be able to kick-start
the demand straight away and we know
that
each year prior to the pandemic around
250 000
international tourists were coming to
the northern territory each year
visiting places like uluru and kakadu
and those international tourists they
stay for quite a while
nine days on average and they spend a
fair bit of money here
around twelve hundred dollars each
during their time here so
the local industry which has been hit
hard of course as as other
uh areas have been around australia
really wants to see these tourists back
and i've spoken to
one of the local industry groups uh
tourism central australian they're
certainly
very much in favor of this particular
european contract they say spending
a few hundred thousand dollars now could
generate millions of dollars
in the future but the only question is
really uh
when those international tourists are
going to be able to return
to australia and no one knows at this
stage indeed jono gibson
reporting there for us from darwin thank
you
australia's multi-billion dollar fleet
of joint strike fighters has been
declared ready for deployment
after comprehensive trials the defense
department has ordered 72
of the controversial f-35 aircraft at a
cost
of 17 billion dollars and for more
defense correspondent andrew green
joins us now and andrew tell us about
the milestone that's just been achieved
selena what has been declared today is
initial
operating capability we've had these
aircraft as you say
for a couple of years now in australia
and they've been
conducting various tests and trial runs
but now the defense department believes
they are ready
in the initial sense to be deployed and
that if australia required
them to be sent somewhere they could be
the f-35 of course has had a
controversial history for over a decade
australia was one of the foundation
nations
in this project that's being run out of
the united states
with the defense manufacturer lockheed
martin
eventually australia is hoping to have
72 of these aircraft at a cost of
17 billion dollars and they're described
as a
fifth generation aircraft they're
essentially a battle management system
with very advanced technology that can
control
other assets on land and sea and even in
the air
but they have had a controversial
history it's been a very expensive
project
one that's been plagued with delays and
various problems but now the defense
department is declaring
that initial operating capability has
been achieved and
the the aircraft will work over the next
couple of years towards
achieving final operating capability
and andrew how many of these aircraft
does australia currently have
we understand around 30 of the aircraft
are now
in australia of that order of 72 and
that
they're mainly based at the moment in
new south wales
uh where they've been doing a lot of
their tests at the
william town air base eventually we will
see them
uh based in a couple of locations in
australia
and uh over the next year we're
expecting around
15 of the joint strike fighters also
known as the f-35s
to arrive in australia defence
correspondent andrew green joining us
there from canberra
millions of americans have lost their
unemployment benefits
after president donald trump failed to
sign a covered relief bill into law
the three trillion dollar package was
approved by congress
after months of difficult negotiations
and compromises
but president trump vetoed the bill
because he wanted more money for direct
payments to americans
and less for foreign aid president-elect
joe biden has urged mr trump to sign the
bill
as nearly 8 million americans have
fallen into poverty
over the last five months
police in the u.s city of nashville have
seized a truck
reportedly heard playing audio similar
to that broadcast from a camper van
which exploded in the city on christmas
day
witnesses told police they heard a
recording from a camper van
telling people to evacuate as well as
songs
from the 1960s before the vehicle blew
up
three people were injured authorities
say it's too early to determine a motive
but they believe the suspect was acting
alone
we're still following leads but right
now there is no indication
that any other persons were involved
we reviewed hours of security video
surrounding the recreational vehicle as
well as we saw no
other people involved around that
vehicle
again this information is what we know
after just a few days of investigative
efforts
crucial tips from the public
corroborated by other investigative
activity by our team
initially identified a likely suspect
some expert work by the tennessee
highway patrol
subsequently uncovered a vehicle
identification number
from the remains of the suspect's rv
that were positively matched to a
vehicle
registered to that individual right now
we're looking at any and all
possible motives we're not at a position
where we can speculate on that now we
are
interviewing individuals that we've
identified that are known
to the suspect we are also asking the
public to uh if
they know him they know i've spoken him
or know his ideology or anything that
might have motivated him
we're interested in speaking to you so
again we're looking for those tips
uk prime minister boris johnson has
promised that big changes are on the way
after securing a brexit trade agreement
with the european union
mr johnson says the deal will deliver
for people who felt left
behind but some have accused him of
caving in to the eu
glad tidings of great joy twelve hundred
pages of detail
spelling out britain's new trading
relationship with the eu
mps and others are pouring over the fine
print
this morning the chancellor tried to
dispel any fears
the uk might be worse off under this new
trade agreement
for those who were anxious about the
economic
implications of leaving they should be
enormously reassured
the free trade deal means that when it
comes to the price of french cheese or
spanish tomatoes
there should be little change according
to the chair of the uk's largest
supermarket chain
the administrative costs associated with
having to make customs declarations
for people sending goods into the uk
will be there
but you know they're they're very modest
i don't think it will make any material
difference
to the prices that consumers pay but the
future isn't so clear-cut on other
important aspects of uk eu trade
today the prime minister told the sunday
telegraph
on financial services the deal does not
go as far as we would like
obviously we would have loved to have
had more in there on financial services
and professional services and services
in general it's 80 percent of the uk
economy 70
of the eu economy but it's the norm for
deals such as uh as this f